[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NATURE SOUNDS]
>> At the moment of conception,
our constitution is formed.
>> This is what
we call a doshas.
>> You can apply this knowledge
of the doshas everywhere,
not just in knowing
our tendencies,
but really to know how to
utilize anything to create
balance.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Ayurveda conceptualizes
that there are intelligences
in the universe, and these
intelligences are comprised
of the five great elements,
which are earth, water, fire,
air, and ether.
And these elements,
these great elements
combine to make
what we call doshas.
And the doshas are Vata, which
is comprised of air and ether,
Pitta, which is
comprised of fire
with a little bit of
moisture, and Kapha, which
is like earth and like water.
>> We all have all of
these five elements,
except we are dominant in
one, two, or all three.
A single dominant
constitution can
be a Vata constitution
or a Pitta Constitution,
or a Kapha constitution.
When I look at myself, the
way I see my constitution
is a Pitta Vata constitution,
which is a dual constitution.
So there is Vata,
Pitta, and Kapha.
There is Vata Pitta, Pitta
Kapha, and Kapha Vata
Constitution, and there
are a few people who
are dominant in
all three doshas,
and they are called a
tridoshic type of constitution.
So knowing your
constitution in Ayurveda
becomes the fundamental
thing to even know ourselves.
And how do we know that?
We are born in
that genetic pool.
The constitutions
that we are born into
comes from our parents.
The sperm and the ovum come in
with their own constitutions,
and in their union is
what we come out of.
So you can imagine
how many millions
of people with different
permutations and combinations
are born with their
unique constitution.
In Ayurveda, each one
is very different.
It's not one size fits all.
>> If you're trying to
understand what a dosha is,
when you look at yourself in the
mirror, if you're a Vata dosha,
then you are going to
be very slim, petite,
but either very short,
petite, or very thin and tall.
Your muscles will be
slender, and your eyes
will be kind of small.
You cannot stay in one
place for a long time,
and you're going to
be very talkative.
You're prone to anxiety.
You're prone to worrying a lot.
For a Pitta constitution,
you're going
to have a medium build
with very defined muscles.
You're also going to be
very sharp in your features
and very crisp in
your talk, and you
are going to be the
person who is very hungry.
And if you don't
eat, you're going
to be very irritable and angry.
So for you, food comes first.
So you have to eat
and then speak.
And if you're a Kapha person,
your frame is going to be big.
When I say big, your
skeleton, your bone structure,
your muscles, they're
going to be bulky.
It's nothing to
do with being fat.
You're just a big person.
And that's genetically,
that's how you will be.
But you're going
to have big eyes.
You're going to
have a lot of hair.
You are going to be
very calm and composed.
You're not going to
rush into things.
You're going to take
time, and you move slowly.
One drawback is you tend
to become lethargic,
so you have to become
mindful about that.
>> At the moment of conception,
our constitution is formed.
And then after that
moment of meeting,
we deviate from
that constitution
into various states
of imbalance.
So someone with a more
fiery constitution,
what we would say a more
Pitta constitution, someone
who is direct, someone who is
kind of type and athletic, they
could develop a Vata imbalance,
an imbalance of air and ether,
because they're eating
a lot of drying foods.
They're engaging in a lot
of mental stimulation.
They're anxious,
they're hurrying,
and so they might
actually develop
signs of what we call a Vata
imbalance in a Pitta person.
Then someone who is more
Kapha in their constitution
or someone who is having
a Kapha dosha imbalance
will accumulate.
Kapha dosha is heavy.
It's cold.
It's like water and earth
mixed together, like mud.
So they might
experience swelling.
They might experience
weight gain.
water retention,
or the symptoms of a lot of
mucus in the nasal passages.
That's an accumulation
of Kapha dosha.
So we're always looking at the
relative state of imbalance
in the body and trying
to apply measures
that will bring us into greater
balance and greater harmony.
>> One of the beauties of
Ayurveda is that not only does
it understand nature, it
utilizes the language of nature
in order to help us
understand balance.
And so we look at things
like fire, earth, water,
and space, air.
The ancients weren't so naive
as to think that the body was
actually composed of these.
They understood that
the body's functions
will pattern after those.
And if we can understand
that patterning
and learn just one simple
rule, that like increases like,
we are able to create balance.
>> In Ayurveda, like increases
like, and opposites balance.
Say, suppose, there is a
very hot summer season.
Obviously, you're
going to feel very hot.
So heat increases
heat in your body.
And the only way you can
balance that is to cool it down,
the opposite.
>> And so unlike me going
through medical school
and three years of residency
before I could understand how
to treat someone, with
Ayurveda, you can understand
the elements.
And if you can
describe something
in terms of the elements,
you know what its effect
is on the physiology.
>> The body that we are born
with is a blueprint of what we
come with, but then how we want
to live is a compilation of not
just what we eat, also what
we think, how we think,
and our practices to maintain
this body and nourish this body
to live a long and healthy life.
>> When we look at
the primary elements,
we see that they
tend to pair up.
This pairing up helps us to
be able to not only describe
commonalities that
we see in nature,
but also to describe
everything in nature,
just as we could with
the individual elements.
And what is very
common, very popular
is that people want to
understand themselves.
So they want to
describe themselves.
And so they look to oh, OK,
am I more of that Vata type?
Am I more of that Pitta type,
more of that Kapha type?
And there's great
wisdom in that,
but it's also limiting
because you can apply this
to everything in nature.
You can apply this to
everything in your life.
>> The doshas in Ayurveda are
intelligences inside the body.
And we break things down
into five elementals,
these physical things that we
can touch and smell and see
and taste and feel.
They need some sort of
animating principle, some sort
of intelligence behind them.
This is what we
call as the doshas.
And it's when they
become imbalanced,
they like to fine we can
tissues and take up residence.
And that's where we'll see
a physical symptom come
about inside the body.
So the doshas essentially are
working behind the scenes.
Vata dosha is actually
the animating or principal
to the Pitta and Kapha dosha.
When you say in Ayurveda
that Pitta and Kapha are
lame in nature, they don't
have that underlying movement
to them.
And so it's Vata that
gives them their movement.
So one of the ways
in which we practice
is always making sure
Vata is balanced first.
When we see an
imbalance in it, we'll
see not enough movement, which
is like paralysis, no movement.
When we see too much
air elemental in it,
we'll see too much movement,
like a twitching in your eye
or something extreme,
like Parkinson's disease,
for example.
Pitta dosha is the
transformative intelligence,
from transforming your food into
nutrients to all the way down
to the cellular level.
And that's composed
of fire and water.
The fire elemental
being in excess,
we'll see too much
transformation,
such as gastric ulcer, skin
irritations, and rashes.
And then too much
water element into it,
we'll see not enough
transformation.
What happens when
you eat your food
and it comes out looking on
the other side like diarrhea,
for example?
This is too much watered down
Pitta dosha inside the body.
For Kapha dosha, we look at
as strength and stability.
One of the misnomers
that's out there
is the association of
Kapha dosha as being fat
into the body, right?
But really, what we want is a
lot of healthy balance of Kapha
dosha in the body,
because this is
going to give you your strength
and your stability inside.
Too much water element,
we'll see edema, swelling.
Too much earth element, we'll
see blockage, not enough flow,
and the creation of a
growth, like a cyst, a tumor,
or cancer.
So we understand these as being
very subtle inside the body.
And when they are in balance,
they are essentially invisible,
governing all the physiological
functions inside of your body.
>> People may ask, is my
dosha my constitution,
or is my dosha my imbalance?
And you know, we all have
all three of these doshas.
Actually, everything
in the universe
has or can be conceptualized
as having these doshas.
They are simply ways
of describing qualities
and describing energies and
describing intelligences.
So yes, you have a
doshic constitution
that can be determined
by visual examination,
by examination of your
Vedic astrological chart,
by various different measures.
And you likely-- unless you're
in perfect balance at this
moment--
it is likely that you may
have an imbalance, which
is a doshic imbalance.
>> The idea is to catch symptoms
as they arise before they
physically appear.
>> Another way that Ayurveda is
able to help us with prevention
is understanding for
my unique physiology,
what is it that is
going to promote health?
What is going to be
most aligned with me?
Being able to
describe ourselves,
our nature in terms
of these tendencies,
these qualities, that
affords us a blueprint
for us to be able to then
organize diet, organize
routine, organize
activities, organize
supplements in order to prevent
things from going out of whack.
And so each
individual needs to be
able to attune their diet
to what's best for them.
So somebody who is very
light and very airy,
they'll have a tendency for
that to cause the nervous system
to get frazzled.
They'll be bouncing
all over the place.
They'll be so
enthusiastic about things
that over time, they'll
fatigue the nervous system
and they'll draw it
out of balance because
of that airiness
and that tendency
to flit from one thing
to the next to the next.
Knowing that, we can then
take preventive measures.
We can do foods
that are grounding.
We can do routine that is
very regular and settled
and forms a structure
For that groundingness
that that airy individual needs.
So you can apply this knowledge
of the doshas everywhere.
And that's where its
greatest power is, not just
in knowing our proclivity,
our tendencies,
but really to know how
to utilize anything
to create balance.
So there are many
angles of prevention
that Ayurveda holds,
that it is not
only tuned in to the doshas
that make up our physiology,
but also tuned in to
the qualities in nature,
the qualities in food,
spices, herbs, and so forth.
>> Ayurveda has been kind
of popularized in the West,
especially as it's
come in with yoga.
And the benefit of that is
many people are learning about
Ayurveda. .
But sometimes it
can be in a way that
isn't as deep as the vast
knowledge of Ayurveda
in its holistic,
scientific way expresses
the properties of the universe.
We often think about us
having a constitutional type,
or I'll hear people
say, what is your dosha,
almost like 15 years ago they
might have said, like, what
is your sign?
It's almost like a
pick up line now,
like, well, my dosha is
this and your dosha is that,
so we shouldn't
date or something.
But this is a kind
of superficial way
to look at the dosha.
>> This is what's very
interesting about how do I see,
these dosha
questionnaires online,
is that a lot of the
questions, for me,
I would want people to ask more
about how have you been feeling
in the last month, right, or how
you've been feeling in the last
two days?
And then really honestly answer
those questions based on that.
They're going to get a better
idea about what the dosha
imbalances are in
their body and then
correctly choose I need
something that's more
Vata balancing or Pitta
balancing or Kapha balancing.
Tuning into what is your
ability to process thoughts,
that's a very simple thing.
How focused can you be?
That is a very subtle way
of tuning into how are you
feeling inside?
What is your inner
core frequency,
in terms of your
emotional state?
>> Just as we can talk about
having a particular doshic
constitution or body type and
we can talk about our states
of imbalance in
terms of the dosha,
we can also talk about the
phases of the life that
everyone moves through
in terms of the dosha.
So childhood has a more
Kapha nature to it.
Kapha is comprised
of earth and water.
It's slow.
It's heavier.
It's mucusy.
Children need to nap
all the time, every day,
and they're always
getting colds.
They're always mucusy
and dripping snot.
That's because they
have more Kapha dosha.
Kapha is responsible for
our strength, our stability,
and our immunity.
And so a child is growing, and
their strength is developing.
And Kapha dosha we can
see also in springtime,
when plants begin to grow.
So a child in its growing
state is more Kapha dosha.
Then when we move into
our middle age years,
we tend to be focused.
We tend to be working on career.
We might be having a family.
We might be very active.
And this is the time of
life that we characterize
as being more Pitta dosha.
We have fire, we have drive.
We're getting things done.
And then the later years in
life are more Vata dosha.
They're more dry.
They're more brittle.
When we look at the elderly,
they tend to become fragile.
They often might
develop something
like osteoporosis, which is
actually the bones becoming
very brittle.
And their tissues
tend to dry out.
And this is because
in old age, we
are entering into a
phase that is dominated
by the energy of Vata dosha.
>> As long as we stay
in our own constitution,
we are in balance.
That is why it becomes
very important for us
to know our constitution
and to keep it in balance.
>> I had a wonderful
mentor who used to say,
give me an hour with any person
and I can teach them the effect
of any substance in the
universe on their body.
And what he would teach are
the fundamental elements.
>> We are all made up of matter,
and matter composes of all five
elements.
Everything is within
ourselves in our body.
It becomes more
important for us to live
in that state of consciousness
and be in that biorhythm.
That's where we are in
balance and we are in harmony.
>> Don't forget to explore the
rest of this series by watching
our docuseries, yoga
practices, meditations,
and self-care videos.
[MUSIC PLAYING]